hello welcome back this is round two of
Alex versus Jay the rematch if you
watched our last video you saw that we
challenged each other to speaking part
one mm-hmm team Alex best team Jake can
you remember what the result was the
result wasn't good to be honest I got a
32% and you got a what
which makes 99 percent which is weird
there's one percent of you who are I
don't know what's going on there but
anyway that didn't work out well for me
so this round I'm pumped
I have been practicing all day and all
night so in this one that you guys
contributed you're part two suggestions
in the comments of the last video and so
we're gonna choose one of those for each
other and just do a speaking part two
same rules apply team Alex or team J you
guys get to decide okay so we have
covered part two in a lot of detail
before in our course we have a whole
section on eg language comm and now I am
speaking part two and there are other
videos which you can find in the section
below but let's talk really quickly
about the criteria sure what does that
mean what's criteria well when you're
speaking the examiner is giving you
actually giving you four separate scores
right you're perform it's like a
checklist right yeah yeah yeah so
they're ranking you on four different
things from 0 up until 9 uh-huh and what
is the first thing they listen for first
thing is fluency and coherence so that's
just all about how easy is it for you to
speak are you hesitating too much
repeating yourself correcting yourself
over and over those kind of things that
interrupt your fluency it's also about
how you link things together ok I find
in part 2 especially coherent to be
especially difficult yeah right because
you have to speak for two minutes and
the temptation is just to go round and
round and round and round which I'm not
going to do in this one oh you probably
will oh let's see about that show okay
what's the second criteria the second
one is lexical resource that's
vocabulary so just like writing it's all
about accuracy I'm
eras you make the precision but also
range like you have to demonstrate a
wide range of vocab yeah and the next
criterion is grammar and it's the same
thing it's accuracy and range ok cool
there are two good things to keep in
mind while you're in the speaking test
it's sort of too late if your fluency is
not there and if your pronunciations no
good but you can control your grammar
and vocab you can put your best words
forward cool and pronunciations the last
one right yeah yeah okay so how clearly
you speak how intelligible you are yes
and it's also they refer to the features
of speech so it's not just that you're
clear but it's how natural you're
sounding in terms of intonation are you
up and down or are you that like a robot
and words stress a lot of Indian
speakers have trouble with words dress
because it's a not a part of your first
language so anyway we've got a cool
thing on e to school I'm just gonna plug
ET to school WWE to school calm if you
having trouble with like the basics of
English like grammar vocation check out
that website it's really good and it's
new yep okay so that is the criteria
mm-hmm what about part two what actually
happens in part two let's very quickly
go through that mm-hmm part two what
happens so Alex what actually happens in
part two
okay so you've come out of part one
talking about you know maybe me or
little personal questions then part two
the examiner says they read a set of
instructions and they give you a piece
of paper or a booklet with your topic on
it right topic talk and they tell you
you have a minute to prepare you can
make notes if you want they also give
you a pen and paper yeah so you've got
the topic day you've got your pen and
paper thinks I'm gonna watch is the
clock young you get ready and then you
talk for two minutes hopefully okay and
this is where you start to get a little
bit nervous yeah not that I am not at
all it's a little bit odd but you know
if you're the test is designed to
reflect the real world so even though
you don't often make a two-minute speech
you might if you're in a job interview
if you're doing a presentation
Yuni if you're running a meeting at work
so maybe I find part two a little bit
weird to be honest but there you go it's
just part of the test so let's work out
how to do it yes let's talk strategy
shall we mm-hmm so we said this is
teacher versus teacher it's also
strategy versus strategy yeah so you use
I have my famous CPF method which I like
to use and it works for like 99% of the
prompts about 1% of the prompts you
don't shouldn't really use it but 99%
you're safe so I'm feeling pretty
confident with my strategy okay okay so
you get your prompt and let's say it's
like talk about bicycles and you think
oh my god how am I gonna talk about
bicycles for two minutes and as I
mentioned before you don't want to go
round and round in circles so what
you'll do is you'll talk about like a
bicycle you had when you're a kid and
when you're talking about that you'll
obviously be using lots of past tense
verbs and then you'll say more recently
I bought a bicycle for five bucks at a
garage sale which actually did by the
way so then I'll be talking more sort of
present perfect or even prison
continuous or something like that and
then that stretched me out to about a
minute and a half and then I'm just
gonna slip in a little story about the
future now in the future of Elon Musk
brings out a new electric bicycle I bike
a cyber bike I would like to buy that
that's gonna slip in lots of modal verbs
future tense and the examiner by this
stage it's just like let's see so my
method I'm gonna just do a more
traditional and more traditional method
which is to follow the prompts on the
card in order with the little twist at
the beginning which I'll explain after I
after I try it after I do it all right
exciting okay so we got Andrew Lowe the
media to go through the comments in the
last video and choose the part twos that
you guys suggested and we also he also
had to and I have not seen these yeah so
we got him to search on the internet
because a lot of the suggestions were
just one line but was the IELTS topics
actually a series of prompts so we found
the right ones and he's prepared them
for us and we are going to just choose
at random so thank you for contributing
by the way we're gonna choose our topic
take our one minute and then do the PPF
method the traditional method and fire
yeah
and we're also going to show you for me
especially I'm gonna show you how I
prepare like what actually goes through
my mind because I'm thinking very
strategically about what I'm about to
say as you'll see in a second okay all
right ready yes here's a piece of paper
and a pen for your notes okay if your
topic I'd like you to describe a company
which employs a lot of people in your
hometown ok one minute all right let's
do this
mmm I wonder what I'll get for lunch
today I tell you why that roast beef
roll last week that was really good yeah
okay don't get that again I reckon I
might be able to make it better though
what if I put cheese on it
yeah that's it that's what I'm gonna
have for lunch today I'm definitely
gonna beat Alex I'm so disappointed
nobody voted for me last week yeah I'm
definitely gonna beat Alex there's no
doubt about it yes I've got this one in
the bag so remember you have one to two
minutes for this don't worry if I stop
you I'll tell you when the time is up
please start speaking now sure so I'm
going to tell you about a company in my
hometown that employs a lot of people
but oddly enough I actually grew up in a
very small town so therefore the
companies in fact there are no companies
in my hometown so what I'll do is I'll
initially tell you about a company that
employed very few people so this company
was kind of strange because it was a
water bottling Factory and it was like
the only company in my small town and I
worked there for a while and it had a
total number of employees of about like
15 people perhaps you didn't actually
require any qualifications to work there
most the people were completely
unqualified and I wasn't you
interested in working there at all I
just did it because I needed to save
some money for university so that was
the first one more recently I've moved
to Melbourne Australia and of course
there are lots of companies in Melbourne
one of which is called e to language
which is one that I actually started and
I started this about nine years ago and
it has approximately 50 people working
for us now both full-time and part-time
in order to work at e2 language you do
require various qualifications it
depends on the department that you are
in for example people in the marketing
team have MBAs and marketing degrees
people in the content writing team have
backgrounds in linguistics for example
so yeah there is a myriad of different
qualifications you need to work here in
the future it would be cool if I could
work at a company like Google obviously
it's one of the biggest companies in the
world and they're very sophisticated and
in order to work there you would need
who knows what sort of qualifications I
did read somewhere that in fact they
don't really care about your academic
background you can just come from say
high school and work there which is very
interesting so yeah so there the three
companies that are in my hometown or
were in my hometown thank god gee I just
tell you about my experience I get
nervous when I do this I find it like
full-on my heart beats a little bit it's
like it's like quite intense so you have
to like really concentrate to get the
words out I want to ramble but you have
to like hold yourself back from rambling
I think you're right there's a tendency
to like Russia and get through
everything then oh yeah 30 seconds yeah
going down taking a breath was very
effective I'm gonna steal that as well
yeah yeah yeah I cheated a little bit
cuz I could see the clock there mmm and
so in the real exam you cannot say how
much time you have left so I really
recommend practicing this just to get a
feel for how long two minutes lasts
because without that you have no idea
how
taking four and it's longer than you
think yeah absolutely okay your turn
all right revenge time here we go here's
your topic thank you here is your pen
yes I'm here is your paper thank you
I'm gonna get the stopwatch going okay
whoo Mike that was pretty good actually
not surprising though he does love to
talk about himself no wonder he can't
keep a girlfriend anyway maybe I'll
apply for a job at Google too hmm what
am I gonna say okay I'll tell you when
the time is up you can start speaking
now okay so my topic today is to
describe an experience that I had as a
member of a team so actually at the
moment I'm besides work I'm not a member
of any teams I don't do any sporting
activities or not a member of any clubs
which is as I prepared this speech I
realize it's a bit of a deficit in my
life something I should probably rectify
but I do want to tell you about my
experience as a teenager as a member of
a team which this experience had a
really profound impact on my life
so what was it it was a swimming team I
used to swim a lot I was it was a club
team not a state or a national team but
we used to train up to 11 times a week
in the morning before school after
school on Saturday morning on Saturday
afternoon on Sunday it was full-on it
really dominated my life and my
teammates life for a long time and the
members of the team were initially just
strangers of course and they came from
all around Melbourne nobody lives where
I lived so I had the chance to meet
people and make friends with people from
really different backgrounds to me which
was one of the best things about being
part of a sporting team but over time of
course we became best friends in fact
some of my best friends now
am i old swimming swimming teammates and
I didn't play any kind of leadership
role in the team
I was just a member of that team I don't
think that was something I really
aspired to as a teenager um we did have
captain's and they were yes there were
great leaders to us but that was not my
role I was just I was just a part of the
team very happily so we achieved goals
in a lot of different ways I suppose we
went to national championships Olympic
Trials at one point okay your time is up
oh okay okay first of all is it bad if
the examiner stops you like that no no
it's not is it totally so you can't
take away points from Alex just because
I stopped it even though even though I
did stop it like one minute and 59
seconds no that's why the examiner will
absolutely cut you off right well any
time even in part one and part three if
you're going on too much or they want to
go somewhere else
they'll just interrupt you don't worry
about it at all how do you feel you went
with your performance then I think I
could do better but I don't want to sway
that audience yeah but uh it was okay so
my little twist on you might have
noticed I worked through each point and
tried to extend an x-man just strap
elated I brought in other aspects and
then probably for me the key is that I
also add an introduction so I always had
something like me as a person in general
at the beginning before I get straight
into the member of the team part yeah
because sometimes if it's something like
the one we saw before describe a piece
of art it's hard to talk about that for
two minutes but if you give some
background like yeah oh yeah I'm
actually really interested in art I went
to a gallery last week bla bla bla 15
seconds 20 seconds you're gone and then
I get into the points um so my topic was
about a small company no a large company
in my hometown and I said there isn't a
large company in my hometown I grew up
in the countryside right and that sort
of is that off-topic no there's no such
thing there's no such thing as off-topic
right what about writing marries what
about if somebody if I had to talk about
companies and I start talking about
sport how do I get penalized for that is
that you know what if you started
talking about something totally
different right November is not supposed
to stop you and I don't think they would
but if it were me I would think he
memorized this I'm gonna completely
disregard it okay and obviously you get
low low points if you memorize something
yeah well I would just it would be like
part two didn't exist so I would still
score your part one in your party
because you can't memorize yeah damn
yeah but part two I would no matter how
amazing it was right if you memorize
that's not your spoken okay good yeah I
guess let's run through a little self
assessment checklist cool I know how
much you love that okay so remember we
spoke about the criteria earlier that is
the checklist the examiners use when
they're listening to you speak here they
are I'm just gonna go through it and
self assess me okay so here are the
criteria this is the checklist that the
examiners use when they're listening to
you okay so you'll be assist against
these criteria first one is fluency and
coherence did we speak fluently without
a noticeable effort did we develop our
topics coherently did we use a range of
connective discourse markers next one is
lexical resource which means vocabulary
so did we use a wide range of vocabulary
flexibly did we use some less common and
idiomatic language idiomatic language
here meaning like natural sounding like
phrasal verbs not raining cats and dogs
and kicking bucket stuff like that just
natural sounding native like English did
we paraphrase effectively then there's
grammar range and accuracy so did we use
a wide range of structures that is
different sentence structures and types
and verb tenses etc did we produce
frequent error free sentences or did we
make lots of mistakes next one is
pronunciation so were we clear did we
use a wide range of connected speech
emphasis stress chunking intonation to
convey our meaning and lastly did we
speak clearly with all the correct
sounds of English when I look at this
a little unsure about my grandma did I
really demonstrate a wide range of
grammatical structures I'm not sure I
feel pretty good about the other things
but I usually try and get in some past
perfect some house modal's like I should
have I could have I think I forgot about
that conditional be nice yeah
if type sentences yeah nice one
what about you anything lacking I'm
pretty confident as you should be in me
so of course you can vote team Alex or
team JJ and you know next video we're
gonna answer your question so I know in
the last video there were quite a lot of
questions about the speaking test what's
the examiner doing why did the examiner
do that so please in the comment section
put your questions and in our next video
we'll tackle all of them we'll have a
break from the fighting yeah
become friends again by watching hey
Alex can you tell us a little bit more
about the mock test on e to language
comm yes so if you want to try a full
computer-delivered
i'll test reading writing listening and
speaking we have the really good thing
about it is that you get to do it face
to face on computer one-on-one speaking
test
all speaking terms with one of our
expert teachers and that teacher will
record the session and I'll also give
you feedback
scores lots of advice to help you it's a
really good way to experience the real
test without
yeah yeah definitely highly recommended
I think that test simulation
face-to-face is so good because honestly
it's a weird experience and the more
that you do the weird experience more
common on normal it feels